

NewsBusters Thisthenewarticlestart
Like Nixon in Watergate, Trump ‘Open to Impeachment,' Liberals Claim
an
the
It’s certainly not a rare thing to have analysts on the liberal MSNBC and CNN cable channels declare that their least favorite person -- President Donald Trump -- has finally crossed the line with actions that will lead him into being kicked out of the White House.
But on Tuesday, everyone from longtime liberal journalist Carl Bernstein to former Watergate prosecutor Jill Winn-Banks spent the day hyperventilating over an article from the New York Times that stated Trump had tried to have his political opponents investigated and prosecuted by officials in the Justice Department.
That item, which was written by reporters Michael Schmidt and Maggie Haberman, claimed that “Trump told the White House counsel in the spring that he wanted to order the Justice Department to prosecute two of his political adversaries: his 2016 challenger, Hillary Clinton, and former FBI Director James Comey.”
For his part, Bernstein pulled no punches when he declared:
There are no excuses, and this is a defining moment in the history of the Trump presidency because this is a demonstration of his unfitness to be president of the United States.
We are now watching a president of the United States undermine the very principles of our democracy.

Of course, Winn-Banks served up her own portion of outrage when she told MSNBC's All in host -- Chris Hayes -- that even an attempt to go after political opponents could lead to impeachment.
Anyone in America can say something should be investigated, she noted, “but you can’t just say: ‘I don’t like that person. Go and prosecute them.’”
Winn-Banks also stated that Trump used the word “prosecute,” not “investigate," so "I think it’s a very serious breach of his authority and is a clear abuse of power.”
In an attempt to drive home her point, Winn-Banks asserted: “If it walks like a duck and quacks like a duck, it is a duck. This looks like obstruction to me.”


She also found the relationship between the GOP President and Acting Attorney General Matthew Whitaker “quite troubling.”
Not surprisingly, Winn-Banks referred back to the Watergate investigation, when “we had L. Patrick Gray, the head of the FBI, feeding information back to [former White House Counsel] John Dean so they could coordinate the cover-up.”
“You cannot have the department of justice sharing information with the target of an investigation or the subject or witnesses,” she stated. “That is what destroys an investigation and its credibility.”
She then claimed: “And this just sounds exactly like the kind of thing that led to articles of impeachment against Richard Nixon.


That scandal from the 1970s was also on Bernstein’s mind when he stated: “Today I read the articles of impeachment against Richard Nixon” and noted how similar the charges against the former president were compared to what’s happening now with Trump.
He continued:
[T]he president takes an oath to defend the Constitution of the United States, to uphold it and to protect it.
This president daily abuses it, but never have we seen such a flouting of willingness to abuse the Constitution and the powers of the presidency as we are now.
“And this is going to be investigated,” Bernstein claimed next. “It’s going to figure in the Mueller investigation. It’s going to figure in investigations on the Hill” and will be “a moment we’re going to look back on … as the time the president crossed lines that must be noted.”
Also in their article, the Times reporters noted that Trump’s original attempt to take action against his enemies was rebuffed by his legal staff and&nbsp; “was one of the most blatant examples yet of how Mr. Trump views the typically independent Justice Department as a tool to be wielded against his political enemies.”
It's always interesting when people in the media address officials they don't agree with. When Barack Obama was in the White House, he was routinely called "President Obama," while George W. Bush and Donald Trump are always referred to as "Mister Bush" or "Mister Trump." That's just another day in the office for members of the "mainstream media."
 

NewsBusters Thisthenewarticlestart
Camerota Defends Linda Sarsour, Tamika Mallory on Farrakhan Ties: They 'Sound Contrite'
an
the
Say you're Linda Sarsour—a big BDS fan and fierce critic of Israel. Or you're Tamika Mallory—a big Farrakhan fan who has refused to renounce him after he recently compared Jews to "termites." We've got good news for you. You've got a friend at CNN: Alisyn Camerota.
On New Day this morning, Camerota interviewed Teresa Shook, founder of the Women's March. Shook has called for Sarsour, Mallory and other March co-chairs to step down over their anti-Semitism and homophobia. For some reason, Camerota started the segment by playing dumb and acting shocked. The Women's March, a force behind a "historic election for female candidates," was tragically fracturing, and she didn't seem to know why. &nbsp;
&nbsp;


&nbsp;
Shook came across as anything but a polished public speaker. She vaguely mentioned actresses Alyssa Milano and Debra Messing -- who are refusing to speak at the Women's March this January because of Sarsour and Mallory --&nbsp;and then said "the relationship with Farrakhan and Hamas were troubling&nbsp;to many of the community." Camerota acted like CNN wasn't a news network, and somehow they didn't have time over the last few weeks to check out what Sarsour and Mallory were saying.
Camerota acknowledged Farrakhan recently compared Jews to termites, but then suggested when Mallory called Farrakhan a "GOAT" -- the "greatest of all time" -- that was a year ago. As if we didn't know Farrakhan's anti-Semitism a year ago?&nbsp;

Then Camerota assembled a series of statements from Sarsour justifying herself.&nbsp; Shook insisted "This has been said before. There's been apologies that have been made before, and they say they will make changes, and then the changes never really happen."
Camerota read (and put on screen) some eyewash that Sarsour and company put out for the press: "We are imperfect. We don’t know everything and we have caused harm. At times we have responded with hurt. But we are committed to learning." Camerota rose to the co-chairs' defense: "Why isn’t that good enough? They sound contrite. They’re apologizing. They want to continue to learn. Why can’t they stay on?"
But Shook repeated her telling point: "I will say that they have said that in the past. They make those statements. And then nothing changes."
CNN's chyron read "CAN WOMEN'S MARCH MOVEMENT SURVIVE FARRAKHAN TIES?" That's not the way CNN handled Donald Trump being endorsed by David Duke. They demanded a disassociation, and then hammered Trump for not doing it quickly enough for them.&nbsp;


Here's a partial transcript:&nbsp;
ALISYN CAMEROTA: Just days after historic election for female candidates in America, at least 102 women elected to the House for next year, there is a fracture inside the movement that’s credited with launching the engagement of women. The founder of the Women’s March is now demanding that her current co-chairs step down over very troubling accusations. Joining us now is Teresa Shook, she is the founder of the Women’s March movement. Teresa, thanks so much for being with us this morning. Tell us what happened. What went wrong? What are you accusing your co-chairs of?
TERESA SHOOK: I don’t really think I was accusing--thank you for having me. I just made a statement asking them to step down --
CAMEROTA: Yes. But what did they do wrong?
SHOOK: There has been some feeling for quite some time that there was some anti-Semitism, and hate speech, and homophobia remarks --
. . .&nbsp;
CAMEROTA: I'm sorry to interrupt. If you could just be specific about what were those events. What specifically did your co-chairs say or do that was anti-Semitic?
SHOOK: Okay, yes. Tree of Life happened, and then the Alyssa Milano came out and Debra Messing came out, and then there was the German NGO that rescinded the award. And we are a global movement, and the relationship with Farrakhan and Hamas were troubling to many of the community and have been for a while and so those were the reasons.
CAMEROTA: So let me try to connect some of the dots as well. So, a week before the Tree of Life shooting, the shooting at that synagogue, Louis Farrakhan made public, anti-Semitic statemetns. He said I’m not an anti-Semite, I’m anti-termite.&nbsp;
. . .&nbsp;
And all of your co-chairs put out a statement in response. This is from Bob Bland, this is Carmen Perez, this is from Linda Sarsour, this is from Tamika Mallory, and basically what they're trying to say is that we’re in the process of learning, that there's a steep learning curve. So here's what they say:
'We are imperfect. We don't know everything, and we have caused harm. And at times we have responded with hurt. But we are committed to learning. We are grateful for people who have been with us for the past two years, wrestling with the challenges and opportunities of what we are trying to build. Our ongoing work speaks for itself. That's our focus, not armchair critiques from those who want to take credit for our labor.'
And, so, why isn’t that good enough?I mean, they sound contrite. They’re apologizing. They want to continue to learn. Why can’t they stay on?
SHOOK: I’m not saying they can’t. That’s up to the community to decide. I was speaking for myself. There's been a huge outpouring of support for that statement and so that’s for the community. That’s not for me to decide. That’s for the community and the sister organizations to work out. But I will say that they have said that in the past. They make those statements. And then nothing changes.
 

NewsBusters Thisthenewarticlestart
Silly Question: 'How Did Republicans Learn to Hate the News Media'? 
an
the
For a healthy dose of how liberals write unintentional humor, see this Columbia Journalism Review article: "How did Republicans learn to hate the news media?" CBS MoneyWatch blogger and former Wall Street Journal investing editor Larry Light claims Republicans have a "prejudice" against the news media, as if there is no evidence....like you've never, ever spent a day on NewsBusters.&nbsp;
He wrote: "My father didn’t want to hear any evidence that contradicted his views, and neither do today’s Republican media haters. The hallmark of a prejudice is that you don’t have to prove it: You just know it."
Light travels through history, from the media exposing Joseph McCarthy and Barry Goldwater, to forcing Richard Nixon from office, and then leaping ahead of George H.W. Bush's last-minute "Annoy the Media" slogan in 1992. Nowhere in those decades is there any evidence of media favoritism, apparently. Just "prejudice" and hate. Then he notes that the Media Research Center and others point to surveys showing few Republicans in the media elite:&nbsp;
[N]early all available data indicate that journalists are overwhelmingly&nbsp;not Republican. Does it then follow that they hate Republicans and can’t report on the GOP honestly? In a time of increasing partisanship, where more and more Americans believe you’re either with us or against us, lack of devotion to the Republican tribe’s line, as disseminated by programs like&nbsp;Fox &amp; Friends, for instance, is perhaps proof enough of bias. For the media haters, at least, it is.
One of the defining characteristics of the right is a sense of grievance. The success of Fox News demonstrates that the “mainstream” media seldom run stories appealing to this resentment. Most journalists tend to roll their eyes at, say, Fox’s perennial year-end coverage of the supposed “war on Christmas.”
The truth is that journalists, particularly at the most prominent outlets, are a highly educated bunch. And they mostly live in cosmopolitan places like New York and Washington, where support is not strong for allowing nativity crèches on town-hall lawns and stopping immigrants from crossing the Mexican border. That doesn’t make them Democrats’ shills or hostile to the right. But it might make them view some of its concerns as less important. My father, a combat veteran, believed anti-war protesters were traitors and couldn’t understand how the media didn’t scorn them as such.


Light somehow hasn't imagined that this lame attempt to deny liberal media bias is as old as he is. "Highly educated cosmopolitans might LOOK like Democrats, but they're only explaining the world in a highly educated way...that's not media bias." It's newer (but still lame) to claim "Not sounding like Fox News doesn't make you liberal." Listen to CNN or MSNBC for five minutes. You know which party line they closely resemble.
Or you could just say: Stephanopoulos and Cuomo, NOT Democrats?&nbsp;
The article arrives as a lame ending, as he notes that in private, Republicans try to work with reporters, and that toward the end of his life, Nixon sought out reporters, since he knew they would help define his legacy. Dear Larry: Just because you try to influence liberal journalists doesn't mean you don't know who they are, and what they will try to do.&nbsp;
Light concluded: "maybe someday, like Nixon, Republicans will tire of press bashing. In the meantime, duck."
PS: The liberals at Five Thirty-Eight did a much better job earlier this year of investigating (rather than dismissing) the media's image problem.


 

NewsBusters Thisthenewarticlestart
WashPost Roasts Celebrity Turkeys of 2018: Melania, Omarosa, Roseanne, and Megyn Kelly 
an
the
The Washington Post displayed its typical tilt in a snide gossip feature on Thanksgiving Day on which celebrity "turkeys" deserve a pardon, like the president pardons turkeys each year. Post "Reliable Source" gossips Emily Heil and Helena Andrews-Dyer made a very predictable list: liberals and anti-Trumpers, pardoned. Trumpers and Fox Newsers, not pardoned.
So we get Saturday Night Live jerk Pete Davidson, pardoned; Kim Kardashian, pardoned; Sacha Baron Cohen, pardoned;&nbsp; and Taylor Swift, totally pardoned! They touted Swift for endorsing two Tennessee Democrats who lost. They lamely claimed it was "a bold move that may have contributed to a bump in voter registration. Snaps for Tay."
Cohen, who faked his identity to embarrass conservatives on Showtime, was bizarrely hailed for exposing "dark truths in a time of fake news and foolishness." But wait, he's foolish and fake news.&nbsp;
The verdict on Kanye West? "Not sure." On the Post's Naughty/Not Pardoned list: Roseanne Barr (obviously), and then:&nbsp;


Melania Trump! "The former fashion model has made some aggressive moves of her own, ticking off what seemed like half the world when she sported a jacket emblazoned with the phrase 'I really don’t care, do U?' on the way to a visit to a facility on the border where immigrant children were being housed. And just this month, she forced out the deputy national security adviser by having her spokeswoman release a statement saying the woman “no longer deserves the honor of serving in this White House” over a dust-up with her staff. 'It’s always good to turn negativity to positivity,' she told a group of teens last week, without the slightest trace of irony."
Megyn Kelly:&nbsp; "The former Today host was ousted from the morning show family following her on-air pondering of whether blackface is acceptable for Halloween. Hint: It isn’t — on Halloween or ever in life. The former Fox News anchor issued an apology but the ensuing backlash (and bad ratings) ushered Kelly out the door in October. She’s stayed pretty quiet since but there’s no telling where the woman who described herself (in her apology no less) as not 'a PC kind of person' will land next to spew more good holiday cheer like the fact that Santa isn’t white."
Omarosa: "The original bad girl of reality TV has made a career out of being hated, first on Donald Trump’s NBC show, The Apprentice, and then on his Washington show, The White House. It’s been a rough ride for the former staffer who staged a bridal photo shoot at the White House and was fired less than a year later. She tried to redeem herself by writing a tell-all book about how terrible her former boss was, but it didn’t do much for her public image overhaul. Anyone willing to secretly tape her colleagues is officially on the naughty list. And we’re not convinced Omarosa wouldn’t return to the Trump show for the right role."
The only set of liberals on the Naughty List? The White House Correspondents Association Dinner organizers:&nbsp;
What is happening with this thing? The rubber chicken dinner with a heavy dose of celebrity glitz is officially dead now, right? After last year’s featured comedian, Michelle Wolf, roasted the Trump administration to a burned crisp, the association has flipped the script and nixed the jokey portion of the evening altogether. Why not throw the entire evening in the garbage?


 

NewsBusters Thisthenewarticlestart
‘Murphy Brown’ Threatens ICE Agents: 'I Will Spatchcock You,' Tries Intimidation to Stop Raid
an
the
Nothing says "Thanksgiving" like some virtue-shaming dialogue about illegal immigration recited by a liberal Hollywood feminist, am I right? The Thanksgiving episode of CBS’s Murphy Brown even included a threat of physical violence to ICE agents and when that didn’t work, verbal intimidation was used.
In the episode airing November 22, titled "Thanksgiving and Taking," Murphy Brown (Candice Bergen) insists on cooking a Thanksgiving dinner for her son Avery (Jake McDorman), a journalist, since he is home this year. He usually misses the holiday with Murphy because of his work assignments. She also insists that her co-workers join them.
When bar and grille owner Phyllis and her helper Miguel (a DACA student worker) show up with the liquor, Miguel tells Murphy he can’t stay for dinner because he is going to help his parents on their food truck. Murphy insists they come to dinner, too, since a winter storm is moving in and they will have no customers.


Suffice it to say, Murphy can’t cook. Miguel’s mother helps Murphy and while doing so, they talk about her coming to America illegally to escape the violence in their country. She tells Murphy that Miguel was only two years old at the time.
The storm causes the electrical power to go out in Murphy’s home so they all head out to the food truck to finish cooking the meal. That is when two ICE agents show up. A neighbor complained about a food truck on the street and when the license plate was run because of a broken tail light, the police discovered that there was an outstanding order of removal for Miguel’s parents, Carlos and Maria. As this is happening, Avery asks Pat (Nik Dodani) to film it on his camera while he provides narration. Needless to say, Murphy isn’t having it. She threatens the ICE agents and then uses intimidation.
Also, one of the ICE agents first assumes that Pat is Carlos and questions where he was born. Pat is Indian-American from Ohio. The implication seemed to be that an ICE agent couldn’t distinguish between an Indian-American, and someone from Central America.
&nbsp;


&nbsp;
Murphy: You cannot barge in here like this. I know you're used to dealing with people who are scared and vulnerable, but if you don't get out of this truck, I will spatchcock you. 
ICE Agent 2: Oh, yeah. I read about that in Gourmet Magazine. It doesn't dry out the bird, and it cuts the cooking time in half.
ICE Agent 1: Reynolds! What did I tell you about losing focus? Look, lady, we're in the removal business. We've got our orders. Maria and Carlos Gonzales, step forward.
Miguel: I'm Carlos Gonzales.
Carlos: No, Miguelito. He is DACA. I'm Carlos Gonzales.
Maria: And I'm Maria Gonzales.
ICE Agent 2: Now we're getting somewhere.
Avery: Hey, Pat, do you have your phone? Record this.
ICE Agent 1: You'll be taken to a retention center...
Avery: It's Thanksgiving Day here in America. ICE agents, with no paperwork, have shown up to arrest an undocumented couple who have lived in this country for 20 years. They have contributed to their community, and they have no criminal record. They pay their taxes, and they are raising a son who will one day become a lawyer.
Murphy: You don't have to put handcuffs on them, for God's sakes.
Miguel: What did they do except give up everything so I could grow up in a country that we thought was the most compassionate place in the world?
ICE Agent 2: Sorry, kid. We're just following government orders.
Maria: Can we have a moment with our son?
Carlos: Miguel. Miguel. We always knew this day might come. We've put some money aside for you.
Miguel: No. No. I'm going to do something, okay? We have to do something. This can't happen.
Maria: This is why you need to finish school and become a lawyer.
Phyllis: I will see to it that … He will always have a roof over his head as long as I'm around.
Carlos: Gracias.
Maria: I love you, Miguel.
Murphy: You know what? I will be your worst nightmare! I know people! I know immigration attorneys! I know judges! They are not going anywhere!
During her morning television show the next day, Murphy Brown goes off-script as she ends the show and plays the video of the ICE raid. Then she emotionally tells the audience that she wasn’t able to help the Gonzales family. She dwells on the fact that parents were separated from their child. It was all about the emotional appeal.
&nbsp;


&nbsp;
Murphy: Thank you, Corky. And on Monday, we're going to have a special segment on -- Actually, I'm going to go off-script for a minute. I normally don't tell personal stories on the air, but something happened yesterday. I can't imagine what it's like for parents to be separated from their child, but I watched it happen to friends of mine.
Video: Officer Reynolds: ...Your subsequent deportation to Mexico.
Murphy: Oh, for God's sake, you don't have to put handcuffs on them.
Miguel: What did they do except give up everything so I could grow up in a country that we thought was the most compassionate place in the world?
Murphy: I did everything I could to stop it. I called in every favor. I pulled every string. But it wasn't enough. People say, "Why can't these illegals just get in line and apply for citizenship?" Well, there isn't any line. There's no path to citizenship if you've come into this country the way my friends did -- yes, illegally. But because they would have waited years to become citizens -- precious years with a young child vulnerable to the gang violence and drug culture that threatened his future. So, if you celebrated Thanksgiving yesterday with your family, I hope you gave real thanks that you were all together. As for me, watching what I did yesterday might have given me a real reason to lose faith in my country. But I refuse to believe that we've become so jaded that we feel nothing when we see these human beings experiencing such heartache. There has to be a way to fix this. We can do better. We will do better. I know we can. This has been "Murphy in the Morning."


Here’s the thing, though. Americans do feel compassion for those wanting to come to America for a better life. However, we are a nation of laws and we have to know who is here in order to protect our country. There are many countries throughout the world with rampant violence.&nbsp;The open borders crowd wants to play on the heartstrings of regular Americans who end up footing the bill for illegal aliens and suffering from those criminal ones who murder or sell drugs or drive drunk in our country. Hollywood can try and paint ICE as the bad guys but regular Americans know that they are putting themselves in harm’s way to protect us all and we thank them.
 
